=== LIVER ===
--- PAGE 25 ---
17:
Liver
Extrahepatic biliary apparatus
Pancreas
Differences between serous salivary gland and pancreas
Applied histology
Chapter
18:
Urinary System
Functions
Kidneys
Ureters
Urinary bladder
Urethra
Applied histology
Chapter 19:
Central Nervous System: Spinal Cord, Cerebellar
Cortex and Cerebral Cortex
Spinal cord
Cerebral cortex
Cerebellar cortex
Applied histology
Chapter
20:
Male Reproductive System
Testis
Spermatogenesis
Epididymis
Ductus deferens
Seminal vesicle
Prostate
Penis
Applied histology
Chapter
Female Reproductive System

--- PAGE 62 ---
Peroxisomes
These are similar to lysosomes in that they are membrane-bound vesicles
containing enzymes.
The enzymes in most of them react with other substances to form hydrogen
peroxide which is used to detoxify various substances by oxidizing them.
The enzymes are involved in oxidation of very long chain fatty acids.
Hydrogen peroxide resulting from the reactions is toxic to the cell. Other
peroxisomes contain the enzyme catalase which destroys hydrogen
peroxide, thus preventing the latter from accumulating in the cell.
Peroxisomes are most prominent in cells of the liver and in cells of renal
tubules.
Cytoskeleton
The cytoskeleton is a network of filaments and tubules that extends
throughout a cell, through the cytoplasm, except for the nucleus.
The cytoskeleton supports the cell, gives it shape, organizes and tethers the
organelles, and has role in molecule transport, cell division, and cell
signaling.
The elements that constitute the cytoskeleton consist of the following:
Microfilaments
Microtubules
Intermediate filaments.
Microfilaments
Microfilaments are made up of actin filaments so they are also called actin
filaments. Their structure is two strands of actin wound in a spiral. They
are about 7 nm thick, making them the thinnest filaments in the

--- PAGE 119 ---
16. Which of the following is correct about serous glands?
a. They are specialized for the synthesis, storage, and secretion of proteins
b. They contain secretory granules in the apical cytoplasm and the secretion of granu
occurs by exocytosis
c. Serous cells are pyramidal in shape
d. All of the above
17. Serous demilunes are seen in which of the gland?
a. Pancreas
b. Submandibular
c. Liver
d. Gastric
18. Identify this
a. Serous acini
b. Mucous acini
c. Serous demilunes
d. Intercalated duct
19. When the whole cell disintegrates to release the secretion, it is called as ____ type of
glands.
a. Merocrine
b. Apocrine
c. Holocrine
d. Cytocrine
20. Sebaceous gland is a type of:
a. Merocrine
b. Apocrine
c. Holocrine
d. Cytocrine
21. Interlobular ducts are lined by which of the epithelium?
a. Squamous
b. Cuboidal
c. Columnar
d. Pseudostratified
Answers

--- PAGE 134 ---
cells are called Langerhans/epitheloid/foreign body giant
cells. Under MPS, macrophages are given different names in
different tissue as follows:
Macrophage/histiocyte—CT
Kupffer cell—liver
Osteoclast—bone
Langerhans cell—skin
Hofbauer cell—placenta
Microglia—central nervous system
Alveolar macrophage—lungs.
Mast cells and basophils arise from hemopoietic stem cell in
bone marrow. At first, mast cells circulate in blood as agranular
cells of monocyte appearance, after migrating into tissue,
immature mast cells differentiate and produce their characteristic
granules.
Two types of mast cells are described in human beings:
1. MCTC type: They have granule-associated tryptase and chymase. These cell
cytoplasmic granules with lattice-like structure. For example, mast cells of skin, in
mucosa, breast, and axillary lymphnodes.
2. MCT type: They have granule-associated tryptase. These cells have cytop
granules with scroll-like structure. For example, mast cells of lung, intestinal mucos
T-lymphocytes: These cells arise from bone marrow, then
migrates to thymus for maturation, and later moves to their
destination (peripheral lymphoid tissue).
 FIBERS OF CONNECTIVE TISSUE
The most conspicuous components of CT are the fibers within it. These are of
three main types (Table 4.1): (1) Collagen, (2) Reticular and (3) Elastic
fibers.
Table 4.1: Difference between collagen fibers and elastic fibers.
Collagen fibers
Elastic fibers
White in color
Yellow in color
Arranged in bundles
Arranged individually
Bundles branch
Individual fibers branch

--- PAGE 137 ---
arranged in groups of three (triplets). Each triplet contains the amino acid
glycine. The other two amino acids in each triplet are variable. Most
commonly, these are hydroxyproline and hydroxylysine.
Physical Properties
Collagen fibers can resist considerable tensile forces (i.e. stretching) without
significant increase in their length. At the same time, they are pliable and can
bend easily.
Reticular Fibers
These fibers are a variety of collagen fibers and are composed of collagen
type III. They show periodicity (striations) of 67 nm. They differ from typical
(type I) collagen fibers as follows:
They are much finer and have uneven thickness.
They form a network (or reticulum) by branching, and by anastomosing
with each other. They do not run in bundles (Fig. 4.12C).
They can be stained specifically by silver impregnation, which renders
them black. They can, thus, be easily distinguished from type I collagen
fibers which are stained brown. Because of their affinity for silver salts,
reticular fibers are sometimes called argentophil fibers (Fig. 4.13).
Reticular fibers contain more carbohydrates than type I fibers (which is
probably the reason, why they are argentophil).
Functions
Reticular fibers provide a supporting network in lymphoid organs, such as
the spleen, lymph nodes, and bone marrow; most glands, including liver
(Fig. 4.13) and kidneys.
Reticular fibers form an essential component of all basement membranes.
They are also found in relation to smooth muscle and nerve fibers.
Reticular fibers are synthesized by fibroblasts and reticular cells (special
variety of fibroblasts).
Elastic Fibers
Elastic fibers are much fewer than those of collagen. They run singly (not
in bundles), branch and anastomose with other fibers (Fig. 4.12B).

--- PAGE 138 ---
Elastic fibers are thinner than those of collagen (0.1–0.2 μm) (see Fig. 4.1).
In some situations, elastic fibers are thick (e.g. in the ligamenta flava). In
other situations (as in walls of large arteries), they form fenestrated
membranes.
With the EM, each elastic fiber is seen to have a central amorphous core
and an outer layer of fibrils (Fig. 4.14).
Fig. 4.13: Reticular fibers (black) forming a network in the liver. The white spaces represent
sinusoids (schematic representation).
Fig. 4.14: Electron microscopy appearance of an elastic fiber as seen in transverse section
(schematic representations).
The outer fibrils are made up of a glycoprotein called fibrillin. Periodic
striations are not present in elastic fibers.

--- PAGE 154 ---
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
1. Wharton’s jelly is an example for:
a. Loose areolar tissue
b. Dense connective tissue
c. Mucoid connective tissue
d. Adipose tissue
2. Cell responsible for wound contraction/scar retraction is:
a. Clasmatocytes
b. Plasma cells
c. Myofibroblast
d. Histiocytes
3. Type of collagen fibers present in the basement membrane is:
a. IV
b. II
c. I
d. V
4. Reticular fibers are seen in:
a. Liver
b. Lung
c. Heart
d. Spleen
Answers
1. c
2. c
3. a
4. d

--- PAGE 236 ---
A tunica intima, media, and adventitia can be distinguished. Elastic fibers
are prominent and can be seen in all the three layers.
The media, and also the adventitia, contain some smooth muscle. In most
vessels the smooth muscle is arranged circularly, but in the thoracic duct,
the muscle is predominantly longitudinal.
Numerous valves, similar to those in veins, are present in small as well as
large lymphatic vessels. They are more numerous than in veins. The valves
often give lymph vessels a beaded appearance.
 LYMPHOCYTES
Lymphocytes are an essential part of the immune system of the body that
is responsible for defense against invasion by bacteria and other organisms.
In the embryo, lymphocytes are derived from mesenchymal cells present in
the wall of the yolk sac, in the liver, and in the spleen. These stem cells
later migrate to bone marrow. Lymphocytes formed from these stem cells
(in bone marrow) enter the blood.
Lymphocytes which mature in the thymus are called T-lymphocytes (“T”
from thymus). These T-lymphocytes, that have been “processed” in the
thymus, re-enter the circulation to reach lymphoid tissue in lymph nodes,
spleen, tonsils, and intestines. There are four main types of T lymphocytes
—CD4+ helper cells, CD8+ cytotoxic cells, memory T cells and natural
killer T cells.
Lymphocytes of a second group arising from stem cells in bone marrow
enter the bloodstream and directly go to lymphoid tissues (other than the
thymus). Such lymphocytes are called B-lymphocytes (“B” from bursa of
Fabricus, a diverticulum of the cloaca in birds: in birds, B-lymphocytes
are formed here). B-lymphocytes are seen in lymphatic nodules. The
germinal centers are formed by actively dividing B-lymphocytes. While
the dark rims of lymphatic nodules are formed by dense aggregations of
resting B-lymphocytes. Like T-lymphocytes, B-lymphocytes also circulate
between lymphoid tissues and the bloodstream (Fig. 8.2).

--- PAGE 257 ---
Palatine tonsil: (A) As seen in drawing; (B) Photomicrograph.
Points of identification
Palatine tonsil is an aggregation of lymphoid tissue that is readily recognized by the fact that
it is covered by a stratified squamous epithelium
At places the epithelium dips into the tonsil in the form of deep crypts
Deep to the epithelium there is diffuse lymphoid tissue in which typical lymphatic nodules
can be seen.
Littoral cells (von Kupffer cells) interspersed among cells lining the
sinusoids of the liver; and cells in the walls of sinusoids in the spleen and
lymph nodes.

--- PAGE 259 ---
therefore referred to as APCs. Most APCs are derived from monocytes
some are derived from other sources.
Functions of the Mononuclear Phagocyte System
Participation in defense mechanisms
As already stated, the cells have the ability to phagocytose particulate matter,
dead cells, and organisms. In the lungs, alveolar macrophages engulf inhaled
particles and are seen as dust cells. In the spleen and liver, macrophages
destroy aged and damaged erythrocytes.
Role in immune responses
All mononuclear phagocytes bear antigens on their surface [class II major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens]. Antigens phagocytosed by
macrophages are partially digested by lysosomes. Some remnants of these
pass to the cell surface where they form complexes with the MHC
antigens. This complex has the ability to stimulate T-lymphocytes.
Certain T-lymphocytes produce macrophage-activating factors (including
interleukin-2) that influence the activity of macrophages. Macrophages
when thus stimulated synthesize and secrete cytokines that stimulate the
proliferation and maturation of further lymphocytes.
When foreign substances (including organisms) enter the body, antibodies
are produced against them (by lymphocytes). These antibodies adhere to
the organisms. Macrophages bear receptors (on their surface) that are able
to recognize these antibodies. In this way, macrophages are able to
selectively destroy such matter by phagocytosis, or by the release of
lysosomal enzymes.
From the above, it will be seen that lymphocytes and macrophages
constitute an integrated immune system for defense of the body.
When suitably stimulated mononuclear phagocytes secrete a tumor-
necrosing factor which is able to kill some neoplastic cells.
Macrophages influence the growth and differentiation of tissues by
producing several growth factors and differentiation factors.
 APPLIED HISTOLOGY

=== PANCREAS ===
--- PAGE 24 ---
Formation of placenta
Microscopic structure
Placental circulation and barrier
Applied histology
Umbilical Cord
Chapter
14:
Respiratory System
Common features of air passages
Nasal cavities
Pharynx
Larynx
Trachea and principal bronchi
Lungs
Applied histology
Chapter 15:
Digestive System: Oral Cavity and Related
Structures
Oral cavity
Lips
Teeth
Tongue
Applied histology
Further reading
Chapter 16:
Digestive System: General Plan of
Gastrointestinal Tract, Stomach and Intestines
General structure of GIT
Esophagus
Stomach
Small intestine
Large intestine
Applied histology
Chapter
Hepatobiliary System and Pancreas

--- PAGE 25 ---
17:
Liver
Extrahepatic biliary apparatus
Pancreas
Differences between serous salivary gland and pancreas
Applied histology
Chapter
18:
Urinary System
Functions
Kidneys
Ureters
Urinary bladder
Urethra
Applied histology
Chapter 19:
Central Nervous System: Spinal Cord, Cerebellar
Cortex and Cerebral Cortex
Spinal cord
Cerebral cortex
Cerebellar cortex
Applied histology
Chapter
20:
Male Reproductive System
Testis
Spermatogenesis
Epididymis
Ductus deferens
Seminal vesicle
Prostate
Penis
Applied histology
Chapter
Female Reproductive System

--- PAGE 96 ---
Stratified Columnar Epithelium
It is composed of two layers, polyhedral to cuboidal deeper layer and
superficial layer of columnar cells. It is found in conjunctiva of eye, certain
large excretory ducts, like pancreas and salivary glands, and regions of male
urethra.
Function
Like all stratified epithelia, it is protective in function, and it also helps in
conducting the secretion of the glands.
Transitional Epithelium
This is a multilayered epithelium with four to six cells thick and which can
contract and expand as needed.
It is called transitional because it is transitional between stratified
squamous and stratified columnar epithelia.
It differs from stratified squamous epithelium in that the cells at the surface
are not squamous. The deepest cells are columnar or cuboidal. The middle
layers are made up of polyhedral or pear-shaped cells. The cells of the
surface layer are large and often shaped like an umbrella (Plate 3.7).
The superficial cell layer, which lines the lumen, is the only fully
differentiated layer of the epithelium.
It provides an impenetrable barrier between the lumen and the
bloodstream. It is exclusively located in urinary system and named as
urothelium.
In the urinary bladder, it is seen that cells of transitional epithelium can be
stretched considerably without losing their integrity. When stretched, it
appears to be thinner, and the cells become flattened (Figs. 3.9A and B).
Example
Transitional epithelium is found in the renal pelvis and calyces, the ureter, the
urinary bladder, and part of the urethra. Because of this distribution, it is also
called urothelium.
Functions
At the surface of the epithelium, the plasma membranes are unusual.

--- PAGE 107 ---
Multicellular: Most glands are multicellular. Such glands develop 
diverticula from epithelial surfaces. The “distal” parts of the diverticu
develop into secretory elements, while the “proximal” parts form du
through which secretions reach the epithelial surface, e.g. lacrimal glan
parotid gland, etc.
Based on the site of secretion:
Exocrine glands: Glands that pour their secretions onto an epithel
surface, directly or through ducts, are called exocrine glands (or externa
secreting glands), e.g. salivary glands.
Endocrine glands: Some glands lose all contact with the epithelial surfa
from which they develop, and they pour their secretions into blood. Su
glands are called endocrine glands, internally secreting glands, or ductle
glands. They secrete the products through the basal lamina onto the blo
stream, e.g. thyroid, pituitary, and adrenal.
Paracrine glands:Glands that secrete a hormone which has effect only 
the vicinity of the gland secreting it/hormones that diffuses to sh
distances to other cells. e.g. enteroendocrine cells of gastrointestinal tra
(GIT).
 CLASSIFICATION OF EXOCRINE GLANDS (FLOWCHART 3.2)
Unicellular Goblet Cells
It is dispersed individually among the epithelia of the GIT and respiratory
tract. They protect the linings. They derive their name from their shape like a
goblet. They have thin basal and expanded apical part. Cytoplasm is filled
with membrane-bound secretory droplets, which displaces the cytoplasm to
the periphery and pushes the nucleus toward base.
Multicellular Exocrine Glands
Multicellular exocrine glands can be further classified as follows:
Based on the mode of secretion (Figs. 3.12A to C):
Merocrine: It is a type of exocrine gland. The secretion is released 
exocytosis without losing a part of the secretory cell, e.g. salivary glan
some sweat glands, and pancreas.
Apocrine: Small apical part of the cell is released along with secreto
product, e.g. sweat glands in the axillae, areola and nipples of the brea

--- PAGE 108 ---
ear canal, eyelids, wings of the nostril, perianal region, and some parts 
the external genitalia.
Holocrine: As the secretory cell matures, it dies and becomes the secreto
product, e.g. sebaceous gland, tarsal gland.
Cytocrine: In testis, the cells are released as secretion.
Based on the nature of secretion:
Serous gland: The secretions of serous glands are protein in nature. Ce
secrete an enzyme-rich watery fluid. Cells of serous acini are triangular
shape with a rounded nucleus. Their nuclei are centrally placed,e
pancreas.
Mucous 
gland: 
In 
mucous 
glands, 
the 
secretion 
contai
mucopolysaccharides. Cells secrete mucus which is thick, viscous, a
jelly-like protective lubricant known as mucin. Cell of mucous acini are t
with flat nuclei at their bases. The lumen of these acini is larger than t
serous acini, e.g. goblet cells, minor salivary glands of tongue and palate.
Flowchart 3.2: Classification of glands.

--- PAGE 110 ---
Compound alveolar
Compound tubuloalveolar (or racemose).
Some further subdivisions of these are shown in Figures 3.13A to I.
 STRUCTURAL ORGANIZATION
Exocrine Glands
All exocrine glands have basically the same structural organization consisting
of three components—(1) parenchyma, (2) stroma, and (3) duct system.
Parenchyma: The secretory cells of a gland constitute its parenchyma.
Stroma: The connective tissue in which the parenchyma lies is called the
stroma. The glandular tissue is often divisible into lobules separated by
connective tissue septa. Aggregations of lobules may form distinct lobes.
The connective tissue covering the entire gland forms a capsule for it.
Blood vessels and nerves pass along the connective tissue septa to reach
the secretory elements. Their activity is under nervous or hormonal control
(Fig. 3.14).
Duct system: The ducts convey the secretory product of the gland. When a
gland is divided into lobes, the ducts draining it may be intralobular (lying
within a lobule), interlobular (lying in the intervals between lobules), or
interlobar (lying between adjacent lobes), in increasing order of size (Fig.
3.14).
Endocrine Glands
They are the sources of many of the body’s chemical messengers, known
as hormones that act at a distance from their origin.
They are very varied in their size, location, and appearance.
Many are solid organs, but few are made up of widely distributed single
cells.
Several endocrine glands consist of more than one type of secretory cell
and may release more than one hormone product.
They can be (a) individual cells (unicellular glands), e.g. enteroendocrine
cells; (b) endocrine tissue in mixed glands (both endocrine and exocrine)
as seen in pancreas and male and female reproductive organs; and (c)
separate endocrine organs, e.g. pituitary gland, thyroid glands, parathyroid
glands, and adrenal glands (Fig. 3.15).

--- PAGE 119 ---
16. Which of the following is correct about serous glands?
a. They are specialized for the synthesis, storage, and secretion of proteins
b. They contain secretory granules in the apical cytoplasm and the secretion of granu
occurs by exocytosis
c. Serous cells are pyramidal in shape
d. All of the above
17. Serous demilunes are seen in which of the gland?
a. Pancreas
b. Submandibular
c. Liver
d. Gastric
18. Identify this
a. Serous acini
b. Mucous acini
c. Serous demilunes
d. Intercalated duct
19. When the whole cell disintegrates to release the secretion, it is called as ____ type of
glands.
a. Merocrine
b. Apocrine
c. Holocrine
d. Cytocrine
20. Sebaceous gland is a type of:
a. Merocrine
b. Apocrine
c. Holocrine
d. Cytocrine
21. Interlobular ducts are lined by which of the epithelium?
a. Squamous
b. Cuboidal
c. Columnar
d. Pseudostratified
Answers

--- PAGE 306 ---
Figs. 10.2A and B: Structure of continuous capillary. (A) Circular section; (B) Longitudinal
section (schematic representation).
In continuous capillaries, exchange of material between blood and tissue
take place through the cytoplasm of endothelial cells
Continuous capillaries are seen in the skin, connective tissue, muscle,
lungs, and brain.
Fenestrated Capillaries (Figs. 10.3A and B)
In this type, the capillary wall has fenestrations.
The “fenestrations” are closed by a thin diaphragm (which may represent
greatly thinned out cytoplasm of an endothelial cell, or only the basal
lamina).
Some fenestrations represent areas where endothelial cell cytoplasm has
pores passing through the entire thickness of the cell.
Fenestrated capillaries are seen in renal glomeruli, intestinal villi,
endocrine glands, and pancreas.

--- PAGE 355 ---
a. Parotid
b. Submandibular
c. Sublingual
d. Lingual
2. Nuhn’s glands are located in the region of:
a. Buccal
b. Palatal
c. Lingual
d. Labial
3. Salivary gland is unique in that, its secretion is controlled by:
a. Hormones
b. Nerves
c. Chemicals
d. All of the above
4. Sublingual gland is ____type of gland.
a. Serous
b. Mucous
c. Mixed
d. None of the above
5. Which of the following is correct about serous glands?
a. They are specialized for the synthesis, storage, and secretion of proteins
b. They contain secretory granules in the apical cytoplasm, and the secretion of granu
occurs by exocytosis
c. Serous cells are pyramidal in shape
d. All of the above
6. Serous demilunes are seen in the gland of:
a. Pancreas
b. Submandibular
c. Liver
d. Gastric
7. Identify this:
a. Serous acini
b. Mucous acini

--- PAGE 391 ---
Subepithelial connective tissue
containing serous and mucous
glands.
Pulp cavity lined by
odontoblasts
Presence of taste buds
Presence of
granular layer of
Tomes
Serous glands of
von Ebner
Apical foramen at the
apex of the root.
Central core formed by
skeletal muscles.
 INTRODUCTION
The abdominal part of the alimentary canal (consisting of the stomach and
intestines) is often referred to as the gastrointestinal tract. Closely related to
the alimentary canal, there are several accessory organs that form part of the
alimentary system. These include the structures of the oral cavity (lips, teeth,
tongue, and salivary glands), liver, and pancreas.
The oral cavity is divided into a vestibule and the oral cavity proper.
The vestibule is the space between the lips, cheeks, and teeth. The oral cavity
proper lies behind the teeth and is bounded by the hard and soft palates
above, the tongue and the floor of the mouth below, and the oropharynx
posteriorly.
 ORAL CAVITY
The wall of the oral cavity is made up partly of bone (jaws and hard
palate), and partly of muscle and connective tissue (lips, cheeks, soft
palate, and floor of mouth).
These structures are lined by mucous membrane which is lined by
stratified squamous epithelium that rests on connective tissue, similar to
that of the dermis. The epithelium differs from that on the skin in that it is
not keratinized (exception—gums).
Deep to the epithelium, there lies lamina propria containing vessels and
nerves.
Papillae of connective tissue (similar to dermal papillae) extend into the
epithelium. The size of these papillae varies considerably from region to
region.
Over the alveolar processes (where the mucosa forms the gums), and over
the hard palate, the mucous membrane is closely adherent to underlying

=== LYMPH_NODE ===
--- PAGE 232 ---
CHAPTER
8
Lymphatics and Lymphoid
Tissue
Learning objectives
To study the:
Overview of lymphatic system
Classification
Lymph, lymph vessels and lymphocytes
Lymphoid organs—structure of lymph node, spleen, thymus and
palatine tonsil
Applied histology
IDENTIFICATION POINTS
 INTRODUCTION
The lymphoid system includes lymphatic vessels and lymphoid tissue.
When circulating blood reaches the capillaries, part of its fluid content

--- PAGE 238 ---
lymphokines. T-lymphocytes are responsible for cell-mediated immune
responses (cellular immunity).
 LYMPH NODES
General Features
Lymph nodes are small masses of lymphatic tissue along the course of
lymphatic vessels.
Lymph from any part of the body (with some exceptions) passes through
one or more lymph nodes before entering the bloodstream. Lymphocytes
are added to lymph in these nodes.
Lymph nodes act as filters removing bacteria and other particulate matter
from lymph. Each group of lymph nodes has a specific area of drainage.
Each lymph node consists of a connective tissue framework, and of
numerous lymphocytes and other cells, that fill the interstices of the
network. The entire node is bean shaped, the concavity constituting a
hilum through which blood vessels enter and leave the node. Several
lymph vessels enter the node on its convex aspect. Usually, a single lymph
vessel leaves the node through its hilum (Fig. 8.3).
Microscopic Features
When a section through a lymph node is examined (at low magnification),
it is seen that the node has an outer zone that contains densely packed
lymphocytes, and therefore stains darkly: this part is the cortex. The cortex
does not extend into the hilum.
 Plate 8.1: Lymph node

--- PAGE 239 ---
Lymph node: (A) As seen in drawing; (B) Photomicrograph.
Points of identification
A thin capsule surrounds the lymph node and sends in trabeculae
Just beneath the capsule a clear space is seen. This is the subcapsular sinus
A lymph node has an outer cortex and an inner medulla
The cortex is packed with lymphocytes. A number of rounded lymphatic follicles (or nodules)
are present. Each nodule has a pale staining germinal center surrounded by a zone of
densely packed lymphocytes
Within the medulla the lymphocytes are arranged in the form of anastomosing cords. Several
blood vessels can be seen in the medulla.

--- PAGE 240 ---
Note: All lymphoid tissue are easily recognized due to presence of aggregation of dark
staining nuclei. The nuclei belong to lymphocytes.
Fig. 8.3: Some features of the structure of a lymph node (schematic representation).
Surrounded by the cortex, there is a lighter staining zone in which
lymphocytes are fewer, called medulla (Plate 8.1).
A lymph node is surrounded by a capsule. The capsule consists mainly of
collagen fibers. Some elastic fibers and some smooth muscle may be
present.
Just beneath the capsule is the subcapsular sinus (Fig. 8.3).
A number of septa (or trabeculae) extend into the node from the capsule
and divide the node into lobules.
The hilum is occupied by a mass of dense fibrous tissue.
A delicate network of reticular fibers occupies the remaining spaces
forming a fibrous/reticular framework within the node. Associated with the
network, there are reticular cells, macrophages, dendritic cells, and
follicular dendritic cells.
Cortex
Within the cortex, there are several rounded areas that are called lymphatic
follicles or lymphatic nodules within the reticular framework.

--- PAGE 241 ---
Lymphatic nodules which are aggregations of small lymphocytes are called
primary nodules, and those with germinal center are called secondary
nodules.
Germinal center is the central lightly stained region of the lymphatic
nodules. They mainly contain immature proliferating lymphocytes
(lymphoblasts). Germinal center indicates the response of the nodules to
the antigen.
Small lymphocytes encircle this germinal center and form a ring called as
mantle zone/corona.
It is mainly in the superficial part of the cortex where the lymphatic
nodules are seen so it is otherwise called as nodular cortex/superficial
cortex.
Region between the nodular cortex and the medulla is called
deep/paracortex. It is mainly populated by the major portion of T-
lymphocytes of lymph node; hence, it is also called as thymus-dependent
cortex.
Medulla
Within the medulla, the lymphocytes are arranged in the form of branching
and anastomosing cords called medullary cords. The cords are separated by
medullary sinuses.
Contained within the reticular framework, the medullary cords contain
mainly B-lymphocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, and plasma cells.
Circulation of Lymph through Lymph Nodes
The entire lymph node is pervaded by a network of reticular fibers. Most
of the spaces of this network are packed with lymphocytes. At some
places, however, these spaces contain relatively few cells and form
channels through which lymph circulates.
These channels known as sinuses are lined by endothelium, but their walls
allow free movement of lymphocytes and macrophages into and out of the
channels.
Afferent lymphatics reaching the convex outer surface of the node enter an
extensive subcapsular sinus (Fig. 8.3). From this sinus a number of radial
cortical sinuses run through the cortex toward the medulla.

--- PAGE 242 ---
Reaching the medulla the sinuses join to form larger medullary sinuses. In
turn the medullary sinuses join to form (usually) one, or more than one,
efferent lymph vessel through which lymph leaves the node.
Lymph passing through the system of sinuses comes into intimate contact
with macrophages present in the node. Bacteria and other particulate
matter are removed from lymph by these cells. Lymphocytes freely enter
or leave the node through these channels.
Blood Supply of Lymph Nodes
Arteries enter the lymph node at the hilum. They pass through the medulla
to reach the cortex where they end in arterioles and capillaries. These
arterioles and capillaries are arranged as loops that drain into venules.
Postcapillary venules in lymph nodes are unusual in that they are lined by
cuboidal endothelium (they are, therefore, called high endothelial
venules).
This “high” endothelium readily allows the passage of lymphocytes
between the bloodstream and the surrounding tissue.
These endothelial cells bear receptors that are recognized by circulating
lymphocytes. Contact with these receptors facilitates passage of
lymphocytes through the vessel wall.
Functions
Lymph nodes are the centers of lymphocyte production. Both B-
lymphocytes and T-lymphocytes are produced here by multiplication of
pre-existing lymphocytes. These lymphocytes pass into lymph and thus
reach the bloodstream.
Bacteria and other particulate matter are removed from lymph through
phagocytosis by macrophages. Antigens thus carried into these cells are
“presented” to lymphocytes stimulating their proliferation. In this way,
lymph nodes play an important role in the immune response to antigens.
Plasma cells (representing fully mature B-lymphocytes) produce antibodies
against invading antigens, while T-lymphocytes attack cells that are
“foreign” to the host body.
 SPLEEN

--- PAGE 260 ---
Lymph Node
Lymphangitis is inflammation of the lymphatics. Lymphangitis may be
acute or chronic.
Acute lymphangitis occurs in the course of many bacterial infections. The
most common organisms are b-hemolytic streptococci and staphylococci.
When this happens in vessels of the skin, the vessels are seen as red lines
that are painful.
Chronic lymphangitis occurs due to persistent and recurrent acute
lymphangitis or from chronic infections, such as tuberculosis, syphilis, and
actinomycosis.
Lymphedema is the swelling of soft tissues due to localized increase in
the quantity of lymph. It may be primary (idiopathic) or secondary
(obstructive). Secondary lymphedema is more common and may be due to
lymphatic invasion by malignant tumor, Postirradiation fibrosis, Parasitic
infestations, e.g. in filariasis of lymphatics producing elephantiasis.
Rupture of dilated large lymphatics may result in the escape of milky chyle
into the peritoneum (chyloperitoneum), into the pleural cavity
(chylothorax), into pericardial cavity (chylopericardium), and into the
urinary tract (chyluria).
Infection in any part of the body can lead to enlargement and inflammation
of the lymph nodes draining the area. The inflammation of lymph nodes is
called lymphadenitis.
Carcinoma (cancer) usually spreads from its primary site either by growth
of malignant cells along lymph vessels, or by “loose” cancer cells passing
through lymph to nodes into which the area drains. This leads to
enlargement of the lymph nodes of the region. Examination of lymph
nodes gives valuable information about the stage of the cancer. In surgical
excision of cancer, lymph nodes draining the region are usually removed.
Spleen
Splenomegaly: Enlargement of spleen is termed splenomegaly. It occurs in a
wide variety of disorders which increase the cellularity and vascularity of the
organ. Many of the causes are exaggerated forms of normal splenic function.

--- PAGE 262 ---
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
1. Blood–thymus barrier is formed by:
a. Type 3 epitheliocytes
b. Type 2 epitheliocytes
c. Type 1 epitheliocytes
d. Type 4 epitheliocytes
2. Modified endothelial cells lining the splenic sinusoids are:
a. Pericytes
b. Stave cells
c. Thymocytes
d. Reticulocytes
3. PALS are characteristic features of:
a. Thymus
b. Spleen
c. Tonsil
d. Lymph node
4. Following are true about white pulp, except:
a. Contains eccentric arteriole
b. Also known as Malpighian corpuscles
c. Formed by aggregation of lymphocytes
d. They are found in thymus
5. Hassall’s corpuscles are formed by:
a. Type 3 epitheliocytes
b. Type 6 epitheliocytes
c. Type 1 epitheliocytes
d. Type 4 epitheliocytes
6. Schooling of lymphocytes occurs at:
a. Thymus
b. Lymph node
c. Spleen
d. Tonsil
7. Cords of Billroth are present in:
a. Thymus
b. Lymph node
c. Spleen
d. Tonsil

--- PAGE 745 ---
Fig. A5.4: Smooth muscle.
Points of identification
In the drawing, muscle is seen cut longitudinally as well as transversely.
Loose connective tissue is seen above and below the layers of muscle.
In longitudinal section:
The smooth muscle fibers are spindle-shaped cells with tapering ends
The nucleus is elongated and centrally placed
No striations are seen.
In transverse section:
The spindle-shaped cells are cut at different places along the length resulting in various
shapes and sizes of the cells
The nucleus is seen in those cells which are cut through the center. Others do not show
nuclei.
 LYMPHATICS AND LYMPHOID TISSUE
Lymph Node

--- PAGE 746 ---
Fig. A6.1: Lymph node.
Points of identification
A thin capsule surrounds the lymph node and sends in trabeculae
Just beneath the capsule a clear space is seen. This is the subcapsular sinus
A lymph node has an outer cortex and an inner medulla
The cortex is packed with lymphocytes. A number of rounded lymphatic follicles (or nodules)
are present. Each nodule has a pale staining germinal center surrounded by a zone of
densely packed lymphocytes
Within the medulla the lymphocytes are arranged in the form of anastomosing cords.
Several blood vessels can be seen in the medulla.
Note: All lymphoid tissue are easily recognized due to presence of aggregation of dark
staining nuclei. The nuclei belong to lymphocytes.
Spleen

=== PALATINE_TONSIL ===
--- PAGE 232 ---
CHAPTER
8
Lymphatics and Lymphoid
Tissue
Learning objectives
To study the:
Overview of lymphatic system
Classification
Lymph, lymph vessels and lymphocytes
Lymphoid organs—structure of lymph node, spleen, thymus and
palatine tonsil
Applied histology
IDENTIFICATION POINTS
 INTRODUCTION
The lymphoid system includes lymphatic vessels and lymphoid tissue.
When circulating blood reaches the capillaries, part of its fluid content

--- PAGE 255 ---
of lymphoid tissue are tonsils, Peyer’s patches, and lymphoid nodules in
vermiform appendix.
 TONSILS
Near the junction of the oral cavity with the pharynx, there are a number of
collections of lymphoid tissues that are referred to as tonsils.
The largest of these are the right and left palatine tonsils, present on either
side of the oropharyngeal isthmus. (In common usage the word—tonsils—
refers to the palatine tonsils). Another midline collection of lymphoid
tissue, the pharyngeal tonsil, is present on the posterior wall of the
pharynx.
Smaller collections are present on the dorsum of the posterior part of the
tongue (lingual tonsils), and around the pharyngeal openings of the
auditory tubes (tubal tonsils).
They together form Waldeyer’s ring.
Fig. 8.5: Coronal section of palatine tonsil (schematic representation).
Palatine Tonsils
Each palatine tonsil consists of diffuse lymphoid tissue in which lymphatic
nodules are present.

--- PAGE 256 ---
The lymphoid tissue is covered by stratified squamous nonkeratinized
epithelium, continuous with that of the mouth and pharynx (Fig. 8.5 and
Plate 8.4).
This epithelium extends into the substance of the tonsil in the form of
several tonsillar crypts.
The lumen of a crypt usually contains some lymphocytes that have traveled
into it through the epithelium.
Desquamated epithelial cells and bacteria are also frequently present in the
lumen of the crypt.
 FURTHER READING
Mononuclear Phagocyte System
Distributed widely through the body, there are a series of cells that share
the property of being able to phagocytose unwanted matter, including
bacteria and dead cells.
These cells also play an important role in defense mechanisms, and in
carrying out this function, they act in close collaboration with
lymphocytes.
With the discovery of a close relationship between these cells and
mononuclear leukocytes of blood, the term mononuclear phagocyte
system (or monocyte phagocyte system) has come into common usage.
Cells of Mononuclear Phagocyte System
The various cells that are usually included in the mononuclear phagocyte
system are as follows.
Monocytes of blood and their precursors in bone marrow (monoblasts,
promonocytes).
Macrophage cells (histiocytes) of connective tissue.
 Plate 8.4: Palatine tonsil

--- PAGE 257 ---
Palatine tonsil: (A) As seen in drawing; (B) Photomicrograph.
Points of identification
Palatine tonsil is an aggregation of lymphoid tissue that is readily recognized by the fact that
it is covered by a stratified squamous epithelium
At places the epithelium dips into the tonsil in the form of deep crypts
Deep to the epithelium there is diffuse lymphoid tissue in which typical lymphatic nodules
can be seen.
Littoral cells (von Kupffer cells) interspersed among cells lining the
sinusoids of the liver; and cells in the walls of sinusoids in the spleen and
lymph nodes.

--- PAGE 748 ---
Fig. A6.3: Thymus.
Points of identification
The thymus is made up of lymphoid tissue arranged in the form of distinct lobules. The
presence of this lobulation enables easy distinction of the thymus from all other lymphoid
organs
The lobules are partially separated from each other by connective tissue septae
In each lobule an outer darkly stained cortex (in which lymphocytes are densely packed);
and an inner lightly stained medulla (in which the cells are diffuse) are present
Whereas the cortex is confined to one lobule, the medulla is continuous from one lobule to
another
The medulla contains pink staining rounded masses called the corpuscles of Hassall.
Palatine Tonsil

--- PAGE 749 ---
Fig. A6.4: Palatine tonsil.
Points of identification
Palatine tonsil is an aggregation of lymphoid tissue that is readily recognized by the fact that
it is covered by a stratified squamous epithelium
At places the epithelium dips into the tonsil in the form of deep crypts
Deep to the epithelium there is diffuse lymphoid tissue in which typical lymphatic nodules
can be seen.
 NERVOUS TISSUE
Peripheral Nerve

--- PAGE 859 ---
Oviducts 276
Ovula nabothi 281
Ovulation 273
pain 287
time of 274f
Ovum
fate of 274
mature 272
structure of 274f
Oxyntic cell 196
electron microscope structure of 196f
Oxyphil cells 300
Oxytocin 294
P
Paget’s disease 81
Palatine tonsil 109, 110
coronal section of 109f
Palms 144
Palpebral conjunctiva 320
Pancreas 42, 211, 219, 220, 222, 222t, 223
types of 210t
Pancreatic acini 221
accessory 221
main 221
Pancreatic islets 221
Pancreatic serous acinus 221f
Pancreatitis
acute 223
chronic 223
Paneth cells 202, 203, 203f
Panniculus adiposus 53

